Kyphoscoliosis is a structural chest wall
disorder that directly impacts ventilation.
As a respiratory therapist, your focus is
not just the
spine deformity.
It's how that deformity restricts lung
expansion and leads to respiratory compromise.
In kyphoscoliosis, abnormal curvature of
the spine changes the shape
and mechanics of the thoracic cage.
This reduces chest wall compliance,
meaning the lungs cannot expand
fully during inspiration.
The result is a restrictive lung pattern,
where lung volumes
like tidal volume and vital capacity are
decreased.
This leads to hypoventilation.
Patients may initially compensate with
increased respiratory rate, but over
time, ineffective ventilation can cause
chronic carbon dioxide retention and
hypoxemia.
Unlike obstructive diseases, airflow is
not the primary issue.
Lung expansion is.
Clinically, patients may present with
dyspnea on exertion,
reduced exercise tolerance, shallow
breathing and,
in advanced cases, signs of chronic
respiratory failure such as
fatigue, morning headaches, or cyanosis.
Breath sounds are often diminished, not
wheezing.
Diagnostics typically show a restrictive
pattern on pulmonary function tests,
reduced FVC with a normal or increased
FEV1-FVC ratio.
ABGs may reveal chronic hypercapnia in
severe cases.
Imaging confirms spinal deformity and
reduced thoracic volume.
Management focuses on supporting
ventilation and preventing progression.
Mild cases may require monitoring and
pulmonary rehab, but more
advanced disease often requires
non-invasive ventilation, especially at night
to improve alveolar ventilation and reduce
carbon dioxide retention.
Oxygen therapy may be used cautiously, but
remember,
these patients can rely on hypoxic drive.
Always assess ventilation, not just
oxygenation.
Red flags include rising PaCO2, worsening
fatigue,
decreased mental status, and signs of
respiratory muscle exhaustion.
These indicate impending ventilatory
failure and require escalation.
From an RT perspective, your role is
critical.
You assess work of breathing, monitor gas
exchange,
initiate and manage ventilatory support,
and educate patients on long-
term management strategies.
Bottom line, kyphoscoliosis is a
restrictive problem that leads to
hypoventilation.
Always think, can this patient ventilate
effectively or are they
heading toward failure?